entailment   Two women stand in a kitchen and wipe down trays   Two women are doing dishes.
entailment   The man in black is flying off the full in front of a red fence.   The man is next to the fence.
neutral   The man in black is flying off the full in front of a red fence.   The man wearing black pants and a black jacket is in front of the fence.
contradiction   The man in black is flying off the full in front of a red fence.   A man wearing pink is next to the blue fence.
contradiction   Swimming in the wide blue ocean.   The ocean swims in the blue wideness.
neutral   Swimming in the wide blue ocean.   It is the backstroke.
entailment   Swimming in the wide blue ocean.   Some is staying afloat and moving in water.
entailment   A bird is perched on a tree branch.   A bird is perching in a tree.
contradiction   A bird is perched on a tree branch.   A squirrel plays in a tree.
neutral   A bird is perched on a tree branch.   An owl is perched on a tree branch.
entailment   A young man sitting under a tree while others walk down the street.   A young man is sitting down.
neutral   A young man sitting under a tree while others walk down the street.   A young man is resting.
contradiction   A young man sitting under a tree while others walk down the street.   A young man is playing basketball.
contradiction   Three children in a black dog kennel.   There are dogs in the kennel.
neutral   Three children in a black dog kennel.   The kids are being punished.
neutral   Three children in a black dog kennel.   Kids are in a cage.
neutral   A girl with a blue shirt and a girl with a striped shirt stand next to a girl with a green shirt sitting in a chair.   The three best friends just got finished playing a game of musical chairs.
entailment   A girl with a blue shirt and a girl with a striped shirt stand next to a girl with a green shirt sitting in a chair.   Two girls are standing next to a girl who is sitting.
contradiction   A girl with a blue shirt and a girl with a striped shirt stand next to a girl with a green shirt sitting in a chair.   The three girls are arm wrestling in China town.
contradiction   By a table with several boxes and two coffee cups on it, a woman in a green sweater is opening a small box and another person (whose head cannot be seen) is operating a small handheld electronic device.   Members of congress opening care packages.
entailment   By a table with several boxes and two coffee cups on it, a woman in a green sweater is opening a small box and another person (whose head cannot be seen) is operating a small handheld electronic device.   A woman in green opening a box while a half concealed man manipulates a handheld device.
neutral   By a table with several boxes and two coffee cups on it, a woman in a green sweater is opening a small box and another person (whose head cannot be seen) is operating a small handheld electronic device.   A woman opening boxes while her colleague checks a shipping manifest.
entailment   Two people using a water buffalo to cultivate a watery field.   Two people are outside with animals.
contradiction   Two people using a water buffalo to cultivate a watery field.   Two people are swimming at the gym.
entailment   Two people using a water buffalo to cultivate a watery field.   A couple is farming with their pet buffalo.
contradiction   Two women are laughing and smiling while they eat a meal together.   The boys had sandwiches.
neutral   Two women are laughing and smiling while they eat a meal together.   Lilly and Sally were laughing while eating lunch.
neutral   Two women are laughing and smiling while they eat a meal together.   Lilly and Sally were eating lunch.
neutral   People stand along a train track and take pictures.   Photographers take photos of the scene after a train accident.
neutral   People stand along a train track and take pictures.   Some people are walking to the train station.
